Asset Pricing In A Financial Crisis.
In August 2007 global financial markets underwent a period of turmoil triggered by
a reassessment of the market for U.S. subprime mortgage debt securities. Inspired by
these events, this question requires you to consider several possible interpretations of
asset price movements, using the Lucas (1978)/C-CAPM model (Hint: The Gordon model
of asset pricing is useful but can also be misleading because it neglects general equilibrium
effects).
The Lucas economy has two risky assets, which we will call ‘subprime debt’ (S) and
‘other risky assets’ (O). The distinction between S and O is that S is subject to larger
shocks than O and therefore, for any given quantity of holdings of the two securities, the
covariance between consumption and movements in S will be greater. (Both covariances
are positive because in a Lucas economy all production is consumed).
Leading up to period t the two assets were priced according to a belief that the
variance of the payoff from a unit holding (a share) of S was x > 1 times the size
of the variance of the payoff from a share of O. Using the Lucas model, describe the
patterns you would expect to observe at time t in response to each of the following three
possible scenarios. (Assume that, aside from the change described, nothing else about
the economy changes). For each case, describe what happens to the level of the two
prices PS and PO and to the two price/dividend ratios PS /DS and PO /DO (you can
assume that the subprime market is small relative to the size of the other market).
1. There is a one-time, permanent drop in the level of dividends per share of S to half
the original level. The expected future relative variance of dividends per share for
S is unchanged (around this new lower level) in the future.
2. The variance of dividends associated with holding a share of S will be permanently
higher, but the mean expected level of dividends remains unchanged.
3. There is an increase in the level of ‘risk aversion’ (the coefficient of relative risk
aversion of the representative agent) in the market. (You can assume that there is
a riskless asset in the market as well).

References
Lucas, Robert E. (1978): “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46,
1429–1445, Available at http://www.jstor.org/stable/1913837.

2

